---
sidebar_position: 3
---

# CPU

## What is a CPU?

A central processing unit (CPU),  
Is the primary component of a computer.

The CPU is the one part that’s found in every computer;  
Regardless of that computer’s size or use.

A CPU is the core computational unit in a computer.  
It handles all computing tasks required for running the operating system and applications,  
Such as arithmetic, logic, controlling, and input/output (I/O) operations.

CPU acts as the brain of any computing device.

## What are the Components of a CPU?

A CPU is a complex electronic circuit,  
That comprises several key components,  
That process data and run instructions.

The main components of a CPU:

### Control Unit

The control unit,  
Manages instruction processing,  
And coordinates data flow within the CPU,  
And between other computer components.

It has an instruction decoder component,  
That interprets the instructions fetched from memory,  
And converts them into micro-operations,  
That the CPU can run.

The control unit directs other CPU components to perform required operations.

### Memory Management Unit

Depending on the CPU architecture,  
There might be a separate bus interface unit or memory management unit.

These components handle memory-related tasks,  
Such as managing the CPU and RAM interaction.

It also handles cache memory and virtual memory.

### Cache Memory

Modern CPUs have one or multiple layers of cache,  
That handle tasks at speeds faster than RAM can achieve,  
Due to the cache’s advantageous position on the CPU’s processor chip.

### Registers

Registers are small, high-speed memory storage locations within the CPU.

They hold data that the CPU is currently working on,  
And facilitate quick access to data.

CPUs have several types of registers:

- #### General-purpose registers

  That hold operational data.

- #### Instruction registers

  That hold the current instruction being processed.

- #### A program counter

  That holds the memory address of the next instruction to be fetched.

Registers provide faster access times than other memory levels like RAM or cache memory.

### ALU

The arithmetic/logic unit (ALU),  
Handles all arithmetic operations and logical operations.

Its math functionality is based on four types of operations (addition, subtraction, multiplication and division).  
And logical operations typically involve some type of comparison (AND, OR, and NOT) on data.

It receives data from registers within the CPU,  
Processes it based on the instructions from the control unit,  
And produces the result.

### Clock

The CPU relies on a clock signal to synchronize its internal operations.

The clock generates a steady pulse at a specific frequency,  
And these clock cycles coordinate the CPU's operations.

The clock speed is measured in hertz (Hz),  
And determines how many instructions the CPU can execute per second.

Modern CPUs have variable clock speeds,  
Which adjust based on workload to balance performance and power consumption.

## How Does a CPU Work?

:::warning
instruction cycle needs more research.
:::

### Core Processor Cycle

CPU works according to an established cycle,  
Known as the CPU instruction cycle.

The basic steps in an instruction cycle:

- #### Instruction Fetch

  The CPU fetches instructions from memory.

  The instructions are binary codes,  
  Representing specific tasks or operations for the CPU.

  The control unit interprets the instruction,  
  And determines the operation to be performed.

  It also identifies the specific CPU components required for the task.

- #### Instruction Processing

  The CPU carries out the specified operation on the fetched data.

  It performs:  
  Mathematical calculations,  
  Logical comparisons,  
  Data manipulation,  
  Or data transfer between registers or memory locations.

- #### Result Storage

  After it executes instructions,  
  The CPU may need to store the results in memory,  
  Or update specific registers with the new data.

  The program counter (PC) is updated to point to the address of the next instruction to be fetched.  
  The CPU repeats the cycle and fetches, decodes, and executes instructions sequentially.

### Additional Processor Functions

The CPU can also handle control flow instructions,  
Like jumps and branches along with interrupts,  
Signals generated by external devices,  
Or events requiring immediate attention.

When an interrupt occurs,  
The CPU temporarily suspends the current task,  
Saves its state,  
And jumps to an interrupt service routine.

After it processes the interrupt,  
The CPU resumes the previous task.

Modern CPUs often use techniques like parallelism and instruction pipelining to enhance performance.

Multiple instructions can be in different cycle stages simultaneously,  
Which allows for more efficient use of CPU resources.

## What are Some Advanced CPU Features?

### Cores

A single-core processor was standard in the past,  
All CPUs have multiple physical cores today.

A core is an individual processing unit within a CPU.

More cores allow the CPU to handle multiple threads (sequences of instructions) in parallel,  
Significantly improving overall performance.

Applications can take advantage of the multi-core design,  
By dividing tasks into smaller subtasks that can be completed simultaneously.

### Hyper-Threading

Hyper-threading is a simultaneous multithreading implementation developed by Intel,  
That allows each CPU core to run multiple threads simultaneously.

It allows each physical core to appear as two virtual cores in the operating system.  
The software uses available hardware resources more efficiently.

### Advanced Instruction Sets

Modern CPUs also feature advanced instruction sets,  
And technologies designed to accelerate specific tasks.

These instruction sets go beyond the fundamental arithmetic and logical operations,  
Providing additional capabilities to handle complex computations more efficiently.

For example,  
CPUs may include instruction sets specifically for these tasks:

- #### Multimedia Tasks

  Such as video decoding, audio encoding, and image processing.

- #### Encryption and Decryption Algorithms

  Like Advanced Encryption Standard (AES) and Secure Hash Algorithm (SHA).

- #### Single Instruction

  Multiple data (SIMD) tasks that require the CPU to simultaneously perform the same operation on large datasets.  
  These are tasks like graphics rendering, scientific simulations, and digital signal processing.

- #### Virtualization

  Allowing virtual machines (VMs) to run more efficiently.

- #### AI Workloads

  Like neural network operations.

## References

- [aws.amazon.com/what-is/cpu/](https://aws.amazon.com/what-is/cpu/)
